Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act 1939

  UNION OF INDIA

  India

Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act 1939

Act 08 of 1939

-   Published in Gazette of India on 17 March 1939

-   Not commenced

-   [This is the version of this document from 17 March 1939.]

-   [Note: The original publication document is not available and this
      content could not be verified.]

  An Act to consolidate and clarify the provisions of Muslim law
  relating to suits for dissolution of marriage by women married under
  Muslim law and to remove doubts as to the effect of the renunciation
  of Islam by a married Muslim woman on her marriage tie.Whereas it is
  expedient to consolidate and clarify the provisions of Muslim law
  relating to suits for dissolution of marriage by woman married under
  Muslim law and to remove doubts as to the effect of the renunciation
  of Islam by married Muslim woman on her marriage tie; it is hereby
  enacted as follows:

1.  Short title and extent:

  (1)This Act may be called the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act,
  1939.(2)It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
  Kashmir.

2.  Grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage –

  A woman married under Muslim law shall be entitled to obtain a decree
  for the dissolution of her marriage on any one or more of the
  following grounds, namely:(1)that the whereabouts of the husband have
  not been known for a period of four years;(2)that the husband has
  neglected or has failed to provide for her maintenance for a period of
  two years;(3)that the husband has been sentenced to imprisonment for a
  period of seven years or upwards;(4)that the husband has failed to
  perform , without reasonable cause , his marital obligations for a
  period of three years;(5)that the husband has impotent at the time of
  the marriage and continues to be so;(6)that the husband has been
  insane for a period of two years or is suffering from leprosy or a
  virulent veneral disease;(7)that she, having been given in marriage by
  her father or other guardian before she attained the age of fifteen
  years., repudiated the marriage before attaining the age of eighteen
  years;Provide that the marriage has not been consummated;(8)that the
  husband treas her with cruelty, that is to say.—

1.  habitually assaults her or makes her life miserable by cruelty of
    conduct does not amount to physical ill-treatment, or

2.  associates with women of evil repute or leads an infamous life, or

3.  attempts to force her to lead an immoral life, or

4.  disposes of her property or prevents her exercising her legal rights
    over it, or

5.  obstructs her in the observance of her religious profession or
    practice, or

6.  if he has more wives than one, does not treat her equitably in
    accordance with the injunctions of the Qoran;

  (9)on any other ground which is recognised as valid for the
  dissolution of marriages under Muslim law;Provide that—

1.  no decree shall be passed on the ground (iii) until the sentence has
    become final;

2.  a decree passed on ground (i) shall not take effect for a period of
    six months from the date of such decree, and if the husband appears
    either in person or through an authorised agent within that period
    and satisfied the Court that he is prepared to perform his conjugal
    duties, the Court shall set aside the said decree; and

3.  before passing a decree on ground (v) the Court shall, on
    application by the husband, make an order requiring the husband to
    satisfy the Court within a period of one year from the date of such
    order that he has ceased to be impotent, and if the husband so
    satisfies the Court within such period, no decree shall be passed on
    the said ground.

  3. Notice to be served on heirs of the husband, when the husband’s
  whereabouts are not known –

  In a suit to which clause (i) of Section 2 applies--

1.  The names and addresses of the persons who would have been the heirs
    of the husband under Muslim law if he had died on the date of the
    filing of the plaint shall be stated in the plaint.

2.  Notice of the suit shall be served on such persons, and

3.  Such persons shall have the right to be heard in the suit;

  Provide that paternal uncle and the broker of the husband, if any,
  shall be cited as party even if he or they are not heirs.

4.  Effect of conversion to another faith –

  The renunciation of Islam by a married Muslim woman or her conversion
  to a faith other than Islam shall not by itself operate to dissolve
  her marriage :Provide that after such renunciation, or conversion, the
  woman shall be entitled to obtain a decree for the dissolution of her
  marriage on any of the grounds mentioned in Section 2 :Provided
  further that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to a woman
  converted to Islam from some other faith who re-embraces her former
  faith.

5.  Right to dower not to be affected –

  Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any right which a married
  woman may have under Muslim law to her dower or any part thereof on
  the dissolution of her marriage.

6.  Repeal of Section 5 of Act 26 of 1937 –

  Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1942 (25 of 1942) Sec. 2
  and Sch. i.
