THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955 (Act No. XXV of 1955)

  An Act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus

  Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India
  as follows:-

  CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1.  Short title and extent - (1) This act may be called the Hindu
    Marriage Act, 1955.

  (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
  Kashmir and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the territories to
  which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.

2.  Application of Act: - (1) This Act applies-

    a.  to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or
        developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower
        of the Brahma, Parthana or Arya Samaj,

    b.  to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and

    c.  to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this
        Act extends who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by
        religion, unless it is proved that any such person would not
        have been governed by the Hindu Law or by any custom or usage as
        part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with
        here in if this Act had not been passed.

  Explanation: - The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or
  Sikhs by religion, as the case may be:-

(a) any child, legitimate, or illegitimate, both of whose parents are
    Hindus, Buddhis ts, Jainas or Sikhs by religion;

(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a
    Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina, or Sikh, by religion and who is brought up
    as a member of the tribe, community, group of family to which such
    parent belongs or belonged; and

(c) any person who is a convert or reconvert to the Hindu, Buddhist,
    Jaina or Sikh religion.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) nothing
    contained in this Act shall apply to the members of any Schedule
    Tribe within meaning of clause (25) of

  Article 366 of the constitution unless the Central Government, by
  notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.

(3) The expression Hindu in any portion of this Act shall be construed
    as if it included a person who, tho ugh not a Hindu by religion is,
    nevertheless, a person to whom this act applies by virtue of the
    provision contained in this section.

3.  Definitions: In this Act, unless the context otherwis e requires,-

    a.  the expression “Custom” and “usage” signify any rule which,
        having been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time,
        has obtained the force or law among Hindus in any local area,
        tribe, community, group of family :

  Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to
  public policy; and Provided further that in the case of a rule
  applicable only to a family it has not been

  discontinued by the family;

b.  “District Court ” means, in any area for which there is a City Civil
    Court, that court and in any other area the Principal Civil Court of
    original jurisdiction, and includes any other Civil Court which may
    be specified by the State Government, by notification in the
    Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in respect of the matters
    dealt with in this Act;

c.  “full-blood” and “half-blood” two person are said to be related to
    each other by full-blood when they are descended from a common
    ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when they are descended
    from a common ancestor but by different wives ;

d.  “uterine blood”- two persons are said to be related to each other by
    uterine blood when they are descended from a common ancestress but
    by different husbands;

  Explanation :- in clauses (c) and (d) ancestor includes the father and
  ancestress the mother;

e.  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

f.  (i) “Sapinda relationship” with reference to any person extends as
    far as the third generation (inclusive) in the line of assent
    through the mother, and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of assent
    through the father, the line being traced upward in each case from
    the person concerned, who is to be counted as the first generation;

  (ii) two persons are said to be “sapindas” of each other if one is a
  lineal ascendant of the other within the limits of sapinda
  relationship, or if they have a common lineal ascendant who is within
  the limits of sapinda relationship with reference to each of them;

g.  “degrees of prohibited relationship” two persons are said to be
    within the degrees of prohibited relationship-

    i.  if one is a lineal descendant of the other; or

    ii. if one was the wife or husband of a lineal ascendant or
        descendant of the other or

    iii. if one was the wife of the brother or of the fathers or mothers
         brother or of the grand fathers or grandmothers brother of the
         other; or

    iv. if the two are brother and sister, uncle and niece aunt and
        nephew, or children of brother and sister or of two brothers or
        of two sisters;

  Explanation :- For the purposes of clauses (f) and (g) relationship
  includes-

(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full-blood;

(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;

(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood;

  and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed
  accordingly.

4.  Overriding effect of Act: - Save as otherwise expressly provided in
    this Act-

    a.  any test, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or
        usage as part of that law in force immediately before the
        commencement of this Act shall cease to have been effect with
        respect to any matter for which provision is made in this Act;

    b.  any other law in force immediately before the commencement of
        this Act shall cease to have effect in so far as it is
        inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act.

CHAPTER II HINDU MARRIAGES

5.  Conditions for a Hindu Marriage: - A marriage may be solemnized
    between two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled,
    namely:-

(i) neithe r party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;

(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party-

     a.  is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of
         unsoundness of mind ; or

     b.  though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering
         from mental disorder of such a kind or to such as extent as to
         be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or

     c.  has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity or epilepsy;

(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty one years and the
      bride the age of eighteen years at the time of the marriage;

(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship
     unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a
     marriage between the two;

(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or
    usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;

[Repealed]

6.  Ceremonies for a Hindu Marriage :- (1) A Hindu marriage may be
    solemnized in accordance with the customary rites and ceremonies of
    either party thereto.

  (2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi (that is the
  taking of seven steps by the bridegroom and the bride jointly before
  the fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding when the seventh
  step is taken.

7.  Registration of Hindu Marriages :- (1) For the purpose of
    facilitating the proof of Hindu Marriages, the State Government may
    make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage may have
    the particulars relating to their marriage entered in such manner
    and subject such to conditions as may be prescribed in a Hindu
    Marriage Register kept for the purpose.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the State
    Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or
    expedient so to do, provide that the entering of the particulars
    referred to in sub-section (1) shall be compulsory in the State or
    in any part thereof, in all cases or in such cases as may be
    specified, and whether any such direction has been issued, any
    person contravening any rule made in this behalf shall be punishable
    with fine which may extend to twenty-five rupees.

(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid before the State
    legislature, as soon as may be, after they are made.

(4) The Hindu Marriage Registrar shall at all reasonable times be open
    for inspection, and shall be admissible as evidence of the
    statements therein contained and certified extracts therefrom shall,
    on application, be given by the Registrar on payment to him of the
    prescribed fee.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section the validity of
    any Hindu Marriage shall in no way be affected by the omission to
    make the entry.

CHAPTER III

Restitution of conjugal rights and Judicial Separation.

  Section 9. Restitution of conjugal rights. - When either the husband
  or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society
  of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the
  District Court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the Court, on
  being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition
  and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be
  granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.

  Explanation.- Where a question arises whether there has been
  reasonable excuse for withdrawal from the society, the burden of
  proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn
  from the society.

  Section 10. Judicial Separation. - (1) Either party to a marriage,
  whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act, may
  present a petition praying for a decree of judicial separation on any
  of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 13 and in the
  case of a wife on any of the grounds on which a petition for divorce
  might have been presented.

  (2) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed, it should
  no longer be obligatory for the petitioner to cohabit with the
  respondent, but the Court may, on the application by petition of
  either party and on being satisfied of the truth of the statements
  made in such petition, rescind the decree, if he considers it just and
  reasonable to do so.

CHAPTER IV

Nullity of marriage and divorce

  Section 11.- Void marriages.- Any marriage solemnized after the
  commencement of this Act, shall be null and void and may , on a
  petition presented by either party thereto against the other party, be
  so declared by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one of the
  conditions specified in clause (i), (iv) and (v) of section 5.

  Section 12.- Voidable marriages.-(1) Any marriage solemnized; whether
  before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable and
  may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following
  grounds, namely;-

(a) that the marriage has not been consummated owing to the impotence of
    the respondent; or

(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition specified in
    clause (ii) of section 5; or

(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of the
    guardian in marriage of the petitioner was required under section 5
    as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Child
    Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Act no.2 of 1978) the
    consent of such guardian was obtained by force or by fraud as to the
    nature of ceremony or as to any material fact or circumstance
    concerning the respondent; or

(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some
    person other than the petitioner.

  (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no petition
  for annulling a marriage-

(a) on the ground specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be
    entertained if-

    i.  the petition presented more than one year after the force had
        ceased to operate, or, as the case may be, the fraud had been
        discovered; or

    ii. the petitioner has, with his for her full consent, lived with
        the party to the marriage as husband or wife after the force had
        ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been
        discovered;

(b) on the ground specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be
    entertained unless the Court is satisfied –

    i.  that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of
        the facts alleged;

    ii. that the proceedings have been instituted in the case of
        marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act within
        one year of such commencement and in the case of marriage
        solemnized after such commencement within one year from the date
        of marriage; and

    iii. that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has
         not taken place since the discovery by the petitioner of the
         existence of the said ground.

  Section 13. Divorce. - (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or
  after the commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by
  either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on
  the ground that the othe r party-

(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual
    intercourse with any person other than his or her spouse; or

  (i-a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, treated the
  petitioner with cruelty; or

  (i-b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less
  than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition;
  or

(ii) has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; or

(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering
      continuously or intermittently from mental disorder of such kind
      and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be
      expected to live with the respondent.

  Explanation.- In this clause-

a.  the expression “mental disorder” means mental illness, arrested or
    incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any
    disorder or disability of mind and includes schizophrenia ;

b.  the expression “psychopathic disorder” means a persistent disorder
    or disability of mind (whether or not included sub-norma lity of
    intelligence) which results in abornormally aggressive or seriously
    irresponsible conduct on the part of the other party, and whether or
    not it requires or is susceptible to medical treatment; or

(iv) has been suffering from a virulent and incurable form of leprosy;
     or

(v) has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or

(vi) has renounced the world by entering any religious order; or

(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years
      or more by those persons who would naturally have heard of it, had
      that party been alive.

  Explanation. - In this sub-section, the expression “desertion” means
  the desertion of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage
  without reasonable cause and without the consent of or against the
  wish of such party, and includes the willful neglect of the petitioner
  by the other party to the marriage, and its grammatical variations and
  cognate expression shall be construed accordingly.

(1) xxxx

  (1-A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after
  the commencement of this Act, may also present a petition for
  dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground-

i.  that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the
    parties to the marriage for a period of one year or upwards after
    the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to
    which they were parties; or

ii. that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between
    parties to the marriage for a period of one year or upwards after
    the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a
    proceeding to which they were parties.

(2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her
    marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground,-

    i.  in the case of any marriage solemnized before the commencement
        of this Act, that the husband had married again before such
        commencement or that any other wife of the husband married
        before such commencement was alive at the time of the
        solemnization of the marriage of the petitioner:

  Provided that in either case, the other wife is alive at the time of
  presentation of the petition; or

ii. that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and
    Maintenance Act, 1956 (Act no.78 of 1956), or in a proceeding under
    section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (Act no.2 of 1974)
    or under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure, 1898 (Act no.5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case
    may be, has been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to
    the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart and that since
    the passing of such decree or order , cohabitation between the
    parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards;

  (iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) was solemnized
  before she attained the age of fifteen years and she has repudiated
  the marriage after attaining the age but before attaining the age of
  eighteen years.

  Explanation. - This clause applies whether the marriage was solemnized
  before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act,
  1976 (Act no.68 of 1976).

  Section 13-A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings.- In any
  proceedings under this Act, on a petition for dissolution of marriage
  by a decree of divorce, except in so far as the petition is founded on
  the grounds mentioned in clauses (ii), (vi) and (vii) of sub-section
  (1) of section 13, the Court may, if it considers it just so to do
  having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree
  of judicial separation.

  Section 13-B.Divroce by mutual consent. – (1) Subject to the
  provisions of this Act, a petition for dissolution of marriage by a
  decree of divorce may be presented to the district Court by both the
  parties to a marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized
  before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act,
  1976 (Act no.68 of 1976), on the ground that they have been living
  separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been
  able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the
  marriage should be dissolved.

  (2) on the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months
  after the date of presentation of the petition referred to in
  sub-section (1) not later than eighteen months

  after the said date, if the petition is no t withdrawn in the
  meantime, the Court shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the
  parties and after making such enquiry as it thinks fit, that a
  marriage has been solemnized and that the averments of the petition
  are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be
  dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.

  Section 14. No petition for divorce to be presented within one year of
  marriage.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it
  shall not be competent for any Court to entertain any petition for
  dissolution of a marriage by a decree of divorce unless at the date of
  presentation of the petition one year has elapsed since the date of
  the marriage:

  Provided that the Court may, upon application made to it in accordance
  with such rules as may be made by the High Court in that behalf, allow
  a petition to be presented before one year has elapsed since the date
  of the marriage on the ground that the case is one of exceptional
  hardship to the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part of
  the respondent, but if it appears to the Court at the hearing of the
  petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by
  any misrepresentation or concealment of the nature of the case, the
  Court may, if it pronounces a decree, do so subject to the condition
  that the decree shall not have effect until after the expiry of one
  year from the date of the marriage or may dismiss the petition without
  prejudice to any petition which may be brought after the expiration of
  the said one year upon the same or substantially the same facts as
  those alleged in support of the petition so dismissed.

  (2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to
  present a petition for divorce before the expiration of one year from
  the date of marriage, the Court shall have regard to the interests to
  any children of the marriage and the question whether there is a
  reasonable probability of a reconciliation between the parties before
  the expiration of the said one year.

  15. Divorced persons when may marry again: - When a marriage has been
  dissolved by a decree of divorce and either there is no right of
  appeal against the decree or, if there is such a right of appeal, the
  time for appealing has expired without an appeal having been
  presented, or an appeal has been presented but has been dismissed, it
  shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry again.

  Section 16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages. –
  (1) Notwithstanding that a marriage is null and void under section 11,
  any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate, if the
  marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is
  born before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment)
  Act, 1976 (Act no.68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity
  is granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or
  not the marriage is held to be void otherwise than on a petition under
  this Act.

(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable
    marriage under section 12, any child begotten or conceived before
    the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the
    parties to the marriage, if at the date of the decree, it had been

  dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be deemed to be their
  legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.

(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
    construed as conferring upon any child of a marriage which is null
    and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under section
    12, any rights in or to the property of any person, other than the
    parents, in any case where, but for the passing of this Act, such
    child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such
    rights by reason of his not being the legitimate child of his
    parents.

17. Punishment of Bigamy: - Any marriage between two Hindus solemnized
    after the commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such
    marriage either party had a husband or wife living; and the
    provisions of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code (XLV
    of 1860) shall apply accordingly.

Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu

  Marriage:- Every person who procures a marriage of himself or herself
  to be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the condition
  specified in clauses (iii), (iv) and (v) of section 5 shall be
  punishable-

a.  in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in
    clause (iii) of section 5, with simple imprisonment which may extend
    to fifteen days, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
    rupees, or with both;

b.  in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in
    clause (iv) or clause (v) of section 5, with simple imprisonment
    which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one
    thous and rupees, or with both.

Chapter V Jurisdiction and Procedure

  Section 19. Court to which petition shall be presented.- Every
  petition under this Act shall be presented to the district court
  within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction-

i.  the marriage was solemnized, or

ii. the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition
    resides, or

iii. the parties to the marriage last resided together, or

  (iii-a) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on
  the date of presentation of the petition; or

iv. the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the
    petition, in a case where the respondent is, at that time, residing
    outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been
    heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those
    persons who would naturally have heard of him if he were alive.

  Section 20. Contents and verification of petitions .-(1) Every
  petition presented under this Act shall state as distinctly as the
  nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is
  founded, and except in a petition under section 11, shall also state
  that there is no collusion between the petitioner and the other party
  to the marriage.

  (2) The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be
  verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in the
  manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at
  the hearing, be referred to as evidence.

  Section 21. Application of Act no.5 of 1908.-Subject to the other
  provisions contained in this Act and to such rules as the High Court
  may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be
  regulated, as far as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

  Section 21-A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases. - (1)
  Where –

(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to a district court
    having jurisdiction by a party to a marriage praying for a decree
    for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce
    under section 13, and

(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the
    other party to the marriage praying for a decree of judicial
    separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce under section
    13 or any ground whether in the same district court or in a
    different district court, in the same State or in a different State,

  The petitions shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section (2).

  (2) in a case where sub-section (1) applies-

(a) if the petitions are presented to the same District Court, both the
    petitions shall be tried and heard together by the district court;

(b) if the petitions are presented to different District Courts, the
    petition presented later shall be transferred to the district court
    in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions
    shall be heard and disposed of together by the district court in
    which the earlier petition was presented.

  Section 21-B.Special provisions relating to trial and disposal of
  petition under the Act.-(1) The trial of a petition under this Act,
  shall, so far as it is practicable consistently with the interests of
  justice in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until
  its conclusion unless the Court finds the adjournment of the trial
  beyond the following day to day to be necessary for reasons to be
  recorded.

  (2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as
  possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six
  months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the
  respondent.

  (3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as
  possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the hearing within
  three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the
  respondent.

  Section 21-C. Documentary evidence.-Notwithstanding anything in any
  enactment to the contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in
  evidence in any proceedings at the trial of a petition under this Act
  on the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered.

  Section 22.Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or
  published.-(1) Every proceeding under this Act shall be concluded in
  camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish
  any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the
  High Court or of the Supreme Court printed or published with the
  previous permission of the Court.

  (2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of
  the provisions contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable
  with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

  Section 23. Decree in proceedings.-(1) In any proceeding under this
  Act, whether defended or not, if the Court is satisfied that-

  (a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner
  except in cases where the relief is sought by him on the ground
  specified in sub-clause (a),sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause
  (2) of section 5 is not in any way taking advantage of his or her own
  wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief, and

(b) where the ground of the petition is the ground specified in
    clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the petitioner is not
    in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the act
    or acts complained of, or where the ground of the petition is
    cruelty, the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cruelty,
    or

  (bb) where a divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such
  consent has not been obtained by force, fraud or under influence; and

(c) the petition (not being a petition presented under section 11) is
    not presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent, and

(d) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in instituting
    the proceedings, and

(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted,
    then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the Court shall decree
    such relief accordingly.

(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act, it shall be
    the duty of the Court in the first instance, in every case where it
    is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstanc es
    of the case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation
    between the parties:

  Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any
  proceeding wherein relief is sought on any of the grounds specified in
  clause (ii), clause (iii), clause (iv), clause (v), clause (vi) or
  clause (vii) of sub-section (1) of section 13.

(3) For the purpose of aiding the Court in bringing about such
    reconciliation, the Court may, if the parties so desire or if the
    Court thinks it just and proper so to do adjourn the proceedings for
    a reasonable period not exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter
    to any person named by the parties in this behalf or to any person
    nominated by the Court, if the parties fail to name any person, with
    directions to report to the Court, as to whether reconciliation can
    be and has been, effected and the Court shall in disposing of the
    proceedings have due regard to the report.

(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce,
    the Court passing the decree shall give a copy thereof free of cost
    to each of the parties.

  Section 23-A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings.-
  In any proceeding for divorce or judicial separation or restitution of
  conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought
  on the ground of petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also
  make a counter-claim for any relief under this Act on that ground; and
  if the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is proved, the
  Court may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he
  or she would have been entitled if he or she has presented a petition
  seeking such relief on that ground.

  Section 24. Maintenance pendent elite and expenses of proceedings.-
  Where in any proceedings under this Act, it appears to the Court that
  either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent
  income sufficient for her or his support and the necessary expenses of
  the proceedings , it may, on the application of the wife or the
  husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of
  the proceedings, such sum as, having regard to the petitioner’s own
  income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the Court to
  be reasonable.

  Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the
  proceeding and such monthly sum during the proceeding, shall, as far
  as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service
  of notice on the wife or the husband, as the case may be.

  Section 25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.- (1) Any Court
  exercising jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any
  decree or at any time subsequent thereto , on application made to it
  for the purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case may be,
  order that the respondent shall pay to the applicant for her or his
  maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical
  sum for a

  term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard to the
  respondent’s own income and other property, if any, the income and
  other property of the applicant, the conduct of the parties and other
  circumstances of the case, it may seem to the Court to be just, and
  any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge on the
  immovable property of the respondent.

(2) If the Court is satisfied that there is, a change in the
    circumstances of either party at any time after it has made an order
    under sub-section (1), it may at the instance of either party, vary,
    modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the Court may
    deem fit.

(3) If the Court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order
    has been made under this section has remarried or, if such party is
    the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or if such party is the
    husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside
    wedlock, it may at the instance of the other party vary, modify or
    rescind any such order in such manner as the Court may deem fit.

  Section 26. Custody of children.-In any proceeding under this Act, the
  Court may, from time to time, pass such interim orders and, make such
  provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper with respect
  to the custody, maintenance and education of minor children,
  consistently with their wishes, wherever possible, and may, alter the
  decree, upon application by petition for the purpose: make from time
  to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to the custody,
  maintenance and education of such children as might have been made by
  such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining
  such decree were still pending, and the Court may, also from time to
  time revoke, suspend or vary any such orders and provisions previously
  made.

  Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and
  education of the minor children, pending the proceeding for obtaining
  such decree, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty
  days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.

  Section 28. Appeal from decrees and orders.- (1) All decrees made by
  the Court in any proceeding under this Act shall, subject in any
  proceeding under this Act shall, subject to the provisions of
  sub-section (3), be applicable as decree of the Court made in the
  exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and every such appeal
  shall lie to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the
  decisions of the Court given in exercise of its original civil
  jurisdiction.

(2) Orders made by the Court in any proceeding under this Act under
    section 25 or section 26 shall, subject to the provisions of
    sub-section (3), be appealable if they are not interim orders and
    every such appeal shall lie to the Court to which appeals ordinarily
    lie from the decisions of the Court given in exercise of its
    original civil jurisdiction.

(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs
    only.

(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within the period
    of ninety days from the date of the decree or order.

  Section 28-A. Enforcement of decrees and orders. - All decrees and
  orders made by the Court in any proceeding under this Act shall be
  enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the Court
  made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time
  being are enforced.

Chapter VI Savings and Repeals.

  Section 29. Savings. - (1) A marriage solemnized between Hindus before
  the commencement of this Act, which is otherwise valid, shall not be
  deemed to be invalid or even to have been invalid by reason only of
  the fact that the parties threrto belonged to the same gotra or
  pravara or belonged to different religions, castes or sub-divisions of
  the same caste.

(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right
    recognized by customs or conferred by any special enactment to
    obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnized
    before or after the commencement of this Act.

(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any proceeding under any
    law for the time being in force for declaring any marriage to be
    null and void or for annulling or dissolving any marriage or for
    judicial separation pending at the commencement of this Act, and any
    such proceeding may be continued and determined as if this Act had
    not been passed.

(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the
    provisions contained in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (Act no.43 of
    1954), with respect to marriages between Hindus solemnized under
    that Act, whether before or after the commencement of this Act.

  Section 30. Repeals.[Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act,
  1960(Act no.58 of 1960) section 2 and first schedule with effect from
  16 February, 1960.

Uttar Pradesh State Amendment

  Uttar Pradesh Act no.13 of 1962 with effect from 7^(th) November,
  1962.

  In its application to Hindus domiciled in Uttar Pradesh and also when
  either party to the marriage was at the time of marriage a Hindu
  domiciled in Uttar Pradesh, in section 13;-

i.  in sub-section (1), after clause (i), insert “deemed always to be
    have been inserted”, the following:

  (i-a) has persistently or repeatedly treated the petitioner with such
  cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the
  petitioner that it will be harmful or injurious for the petitioner to
  live with the other party, or” and

ii. for clause (viii) (since repealed) substitute (and shall be deemed
    always to have been so substituted) the following:

  “(viii) has not resumed cohabitation after the passing of a decree for
  judicial separation against that party; and-

a.  a period of two years has elapsed since the passing of such decree,
    or

b.  the case is one of exceptional hardship to the petitioner or of
    exceptional depravity on the part of the party; or”

  Note:1. This electronic version of this statute is reproduced for your
  convenience and personal use only and may not be copied for the
  purpose of re-sale in this or any other form. Formatting of this
  electronic version may differ from the official, printed version.
  Where accuracy is critical, please consult official gazette
  notifications.

  Note: 2 . If you need full text you may consult THE HINDU MARRIAGE
  ACT, 1955 published in the gazette.

  * Please note:- The Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) Rules,
  1973 have been notified by Notification No.3806/7-K-2-664-55 Dated
  September 15, 1973 is also available below.

  THE UTTAR PRADESH HINDU MARRIAGE (REGISTRATION) RULES, 1973

  Nyaya(Adinastha Nyayalaya)Anubhag

NOTIFICATION No.3806/7 -K-2-664-55

  Lucknow, Dated September 15, 1973.

  Note- The amendment made in these rules by the notification
  no.1346/VII-A.N.-664/55 dated April 10,1980 in Uttar Pradesh Hindu
  Marriage (Registration) (First Amendment) Rules, 1980 by
  Nyaya(Adinastha Nyayalaya)Anubhag has been included.

  In exercise of the powers conferred by section 8 of the Hindu Marriage
  Act, 1955 (Act no.25 of 1955), the Governor is pleased to make the
  following rules:

  Short title, extent and commencement. - 1(1) These rules may be called
  the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) Rules, 1973.

(2) They shall extend to the whole of Uttar Pradesh.

(3) They shall come into force on such date as the State Government may
    by notification in the Gazette, appoint in this behalf.

2.  Definitions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise
    requires-

    a.  “the Act” means the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (Act no.25 of
        1955);

    b.  “Registrar General” means the Inspector General of Registration
        appointed under section 3 of the Registration Act, 1908 (Act
        no.16 of 1908);

    c.  “Marriage” means a Hindu Marriage to which the Act applies;

    d.  “Registrar” means the Registrar of Hindu Marriages having
        jurisdiction under Rule 3;

    e.  “Registrar of the District” means the Registrar of the District
        appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908 (Act
        no.16 of 1908) and includes the officer performing the duties of
        a Registrar under section 10 and 11of that Act;

    f.  “Sub-Registrar” means a Sub-Registrar appointed by the State
        Government under the Registration Act, 1908 (Act no.16 of 1908)
        and includes a person so appointed under section 12 of that Act.

3.  Jurisdiction of Registrar and Sub-Registrar.-For the purpose of
    these rules, every Sub-Registrar within the limits of his
    jurisdiction and every

  Registrar of the District within the district shall exercise the
  powers and perform the duties of Registrar of Hindu Marriages.

Registration of Marriages.-

(1) The parties to any marriage may, on payment of the fee specified in
    Rule 10, have the particulars relating to marriage entered in the
    Hindu Marriage Register kept for the purpose in the office of the
    Registrar.

(2) An application for registration of a marriage shall be made in
    duplicate to the Registrar within whose jurisdiction the marriage is
    solemnized or within whose jurisdiction the husband permanently
    resides and shall be in Form ‘A’ of the Schedule to these rules:

  Provided that, if the application is made to the Registrar within
  whose territorial jurisdiction the marriage is solemnized and the
  husband does not permanently reside within such jurisdiction, it shall
  be made in triplicate and the third copy of the applicatio n shall be
  forwarded by the Registrar receiving the application to the Registrar
  within whose jurisdiction the husband permanently resides:

  Provided further that the application for registration of marriage
  shall ordinarily be presented to a Sub-Registrar having jurisdiction,
  but the Registrar of the district may in his discretion also entertain
  any such application.

  X [ (3) The application mentioned in sub-rule (2) shall be accompanied
  by a certificate by a member of the Parliament, member of State
  Legislature, Gazetted Officer, Pradhan of a Gaon Sabha, Sarpanch of a
  Nyaya Panchayat, Pramukh of a Kshetra Samiti or the President of any
  other Local Body and where any such party to the marriage resides
  outside India by the Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, as to the identity
  of the parties to the marriage and the correctness of other
  particulars appearing in the application, and shall be presented
  personally to the Registrar concerned:

  Provided that where the applicant resides outside India, it may be
  sent through Indian Consul or Vice-Consul by registered post. Where
  the person presenting the application so desires, he shall be given a
  receipt for the application in the following form:

  “Received an application for registration of marriage between… and

  …… presented by…………

  (Signature)

  Registrar of Hindu Marriages… ”

  (4) Where the application is sent by registered post the fee shall be
  remitted by money order at the remitter’s expense and the receipt
  issued to

  the remitter by the post office through which the remittance is made
  shall be attached to the application.]

  X-[Amended the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) (First
  Amendment) Rules, 1980]

4.  Hindu Marriage Register.-(1) A Hindu Marriage Register shall be kept
    in the form of a file book consisting of serially numbered butts.

(2) The Registrar shall certify under his signature, on the title page
    of every blank register issued to him, the number of pages actually
    contained in such register and shall also note the date on which the
    register was received by him.

(3) At the close of every calendar year, the Registrar shall certify the
    number of applications registered during the year and wherever a
    register is completed, the Registrar shall also certify the number
    of applications registered in that particular register.

(4) The registers used by the Registrar shall be serially numbered.

5.  Filing of application. - Each application duly made to the Registrar
    under Rule 4 shall be filled by him in the Hindu Marriage Register
    by pasting it on the first blank butt available in the register.

6.  Endorsement on application. - (1) Each application and its duplicate
    and also its triplicate wherever required shall be endorsed by the
    Registrar with the following endorsement duly signed by him, on the
    reverse thereof, namely:

  “The application was received by me on ………200.. and it is filed at
  serial no…. of 200… on page ………..of volume ………of the Hindu Marriage
  Register maintained under the Hindu Marriage Registration (Uttar
  Pradesh) Rules, 1973.

  (Signature)

  Registrar of Hindu Marriages… ”

  (2) The Registrar shall as soon as may inform the applicants in
  writing that their marriage has been duly registered.

7.  Duplicates. - On or before the seventh day of each month, the
    Sub-Registrar shall send by registered post to the Registrar of the
    district all duplicate copies of the application received by him
    during the preceding month along with a covering letter indicating
    therein the serial number of the duplicate copies of the application
    sent therewith and if no application was

  received in the previous month then a letter indicating that no
  application was received.

8.  Filing of the application by Registrar. - On receipt of the
    duplicate copies of the application sent under Rule 8, the Registrar
    of the district shall file or cause to be filed such duplicate
    copies by pasting them in registers maintained for that purpose by
    the Registrar.

  Y [10. Fees.-(1) The fee for entertaining an application for
  registration of a marriage shall be-

(i) Rs.2.00, if the application for registration of a marriage is made
    within two months of the date of its solemnization;

(ii) Rs.4.00, if the application for registration of a marriage is made
     after two months of the date of its solemnization and shall be paid
     to the Registrar either in cash or by money-order.

     2.  Certified extract from the Hindu Marriage Register shall, on an
         application to the Registrar or Registrar General, be given by
         him on payment of a fee of Rs.2.00,

(3) For making a search, the fee shall be-

    i.  if the entry relates to the current year, Rs.1.00,

    ii. if the entry relates to the immediately previous year, Rs.1.50,

    iii. if the entry relates to year before that, Rs.2.00 and so on
         with the addition of 50P for each year.]

  Y[Amended the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) (First
  Amendment) Rules, 1980]

11. Form of receipt. - A receipt from the receipt book in the Form no.8
    of the Appendix I of the Registration Manual, Part II shall be
    issued for acknowledging receipt of the fees paid under these rules.

12. Cash book. - The Registrar shall maintain or cause to be maintained
    a cash-book in Form “B” of the Schedule. All fees received under the
    Rules shall be brought to account in the cash book every day and the
    Registrar shall sign the same in token of his verifying the
    correctness of the day’s total collection of fees.

13. Power of Registrar. - (1) If an application for registration of
    marriage or for a certified extract from the Marriage Register is
    incomplete or defective in any respect or is not accompanied by the
    fee specified in Rule 10, the Registrar shall require the applicant
    to remove the defect or pay the said fee,

  as the case may be, within such time as may be specif ied by him
  failing which the application shall be rejected.

  (2) If the Registrar receiving such application has no jurisdiction to
  receive the same, he shall return it to the applicant for being
  presented to the proper authority.

2.  Where an objection to any application for registration is received
    by a Sub-Registrar, he shall refer the same to the Registrar of the
    district, who shall decide the same as also objections received by
    him after hearing the parties affected thereby and his decision
    subject to any decree or order of a competent Court be final, in so
    far as the question of action on the application for registration is
    concerned.

3.  The particulars of all applications which are returned or of which

  registration is refused as aforesaid shall be noted in a register in
  Form “C” of the Schedule appended to these rules.

14. Superintendence. - The Registrar shall perform his duties and
    exercise his powers under the general superintendence of the
    Registrar General.

15. Forms.-Blank forms of application for registration shall be supplied
    by the Registrar free of charge to the parties to a marriage. The
    parties may, however, at their option use legibly typed forms.

16. Preservation of registers and records.-(1) The Hindu Marriage
    Registers and the indices referred to in Rule 17 shall, after six
    years of their completion, be consigned to, and preserved
    permanently in the Central Record Room at the headquarters of the
    registration district.

  (2) All other records and papers such as receipt books, cash books,
  applications for extract of the Register, etc., shall be destroyed by
  the Registrar after the expiry of a period of six years.

17. Indexing of entries in the register of marriage.-All entries in the
    Hindu Marriage Register shall be indexed and the indices shall be in
    two forms, namely, one in the name of the bridegroom and the other
    in the name of the bride and such indices shall be available for
    inspection to any person on payment of inspection fee of fifty paise
    per year of record.

  SCHEDULE

  FORM A

  See Rule 4(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration)
  Rules, 1973.

  Application for registration of Hindu Marriage

  To,

  The Registrar of Hindu Marriages,

  … District.

  Uttar Pradesh.

  Sir,

  A Hindu marriage in accordance with the provisions of the Hindu
  Marriage Act, 1955, has been solemnized between us, the undersigned
  parties, on and we request that the following particulars of our

  marriage be registered in the Hindu Marriage Register.

Particulars of Marriage

1.  Date of marriage…………

2.  Place of marriage (with sufficient particulars to locate the
    place)……

3.  Particulars of bridegroom.

    a.  Full name and occupation……….

    b.  Domicile…….

    c.  Age (which shall not be less than 21 years: See section 5)

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Permanent address………..

    f.  Address at the time of application……….

    g.  Status at the time of marriage, whether, unmarried, widower,
          divorced,

  Signature of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

4.  Particulars of the bride:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Domicile…….

    c.  Age

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Permanent address………..

    f.  Address at the time of application……….

    g.  Status at the time of marriage, whether, unmarried, widower,
          divorced,

  Signature of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

5.  Full particulars of the bridegroom’s father:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Occupation……

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Address at the time of application……….

    f.  Whether alive or dead

  Signature of the father of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

  (N.B. Signature of the bridegroom’s father is not obligatory)

6.  Particulars of the bride’s father or other guardian:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Occupation……

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Address at the time of application……….

    f.  Relationship of the guardian with bride (See Section 6)

  Signature of the father of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

  (N.B. Signature of the bride’s father or guardian is not obligatory
  where the bride’s age is not less than 18 years, on the date of
  application but the signature of her father or guardian is necessary
  where on the date of application she is below 18 years and the
  marriage was performed in accordance with the law as in force on the
  date of marriage)

7.  Particulars of the Officiating Priest:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Usual place of residence………

    d.  Address……

  (N.B. It shall not be obligatory to enter particulars of the
  officiating priest, if the marriage took place more than a year before
  the date of the application. His signature is not obligatory.)

  Signature of the officiating priest

  Dated…………

8.  Declaration. - I solemnly declare that the particulars given in this
    application, is so far as they relate to myself and to the
    solemnization of marriage are true to the best of my knowledge and
    the rest are based on information received and believed to be true.

  Signature of the Bridegroom Dated……….

9.  (1). Witness:

    a.  Full name…

    b.  Address…

  (2). Witness:

(a) Full name…

(b) Address…

  Signature of the bride

  Signature ……… Dated……………

  Signature Dated……………

  Certificate by ………… (Designation) (a Member if

  Parliament/Member of State Legislature/Gazetted Officer/Pradhan/
  Sarpanch/ Pramukh/President of a Local Body/Consul/Vice-Consul), as to
  the identity of the bridegroom and the bride and other particulars of
  this application is appended herewith.

  Note:- Certificate may be by more than one such person where one
  cannot certify to the identity of both the parties or all other
  particulars.

  FORM ‘B’

(See Rule 12 of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) Rules, 1973)

+--------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+--------+
|   R    |   De  |        |   Sig  |        |   C    |       |   R    |
| eceipt | tails | Amount | nature | Amount | hallan |  Sign | emarks |
|   no.  |   of  |        |   of   |   cr   |   no.  | ature |        |
|   and  |   the |  Rs.P. |   the  | edited |   and  |   of  |        |
|   date |   a   |        |   Reg  |   to   |   date |       |        |
|        | mount |        | istrar |   the  |        |  Regi |        |
|        |   rea |        |   of   |   Tr   |        | strar |        |
|        | lized |        |   Mar  | easury |        |   of  |        |
|        |       |        | riages |        |        |       |        |
|        | Rs.P. |        |        |  Rs.P. |        |  Marr |        |
|        |       |        |   and  |        |        | iages |        |
|        |       |        |   date |        |        |       |        |
|        |       |        |        |        |        |   and |        |
|        |       |        |        |        |        |       |        |
|        |       |        |        |        |        |  date |        |
+========+=======+========+========+========+========+=======+========+
|   1    |   2   |   3    |   4    |   5    |   6    |   7   |   8    |
+--------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+--------+
|        |       |        |        |        |        |       |        |
+--------+-------+--------+--------+--------+--------+-------+--------+

  FORM ‘C’

(See Rule 12 of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage (Registration) Rules, 1973)

+-------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
|   S   |   Date of         |   Parties   |   Whether   |   Reasons   |
| erial |   presentation    |   to the    |   refused   |   for       |
|   no. |   and the name of |   marriage  |   or        |   refusal   |
|       |   the person      |   and the   |   returned  |             |
|       |                   |             |             |             |
|       |   presenting the  |   date of   |             |             |
|       |   application     |   marriage  |             |             |
+=======+===================+=============+=============+=============+
|   1   |   2               |   3         |   4         |   5         |
+-------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
|       |                   |             |             |             |
+-------+-------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

  English translation of Nyaya (Adhinastha Nyayalaya) Anubhag
  Notification no.1346/VII-A.N.-664/55 dated April 10, 1980 published in
  U.P.Gazette extraordinary dated 10^(th) April, 1989.

  In exercise of the powers under section 8 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
  1955 (Act no.25 of 1989), the Governor is pleased to make the
  following rules:-

1.  Short title and commencement- (1) These rules may be called the
    Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage Registration (First Amendment) Rules,
    1980.

  (2) They shall come into force with effect from the date of their
  publication in the Gazette.

2.  Amendment of Rule 2. - In Rule 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage
    Registration Rules, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as said rules),
    for clause (b) the following clause (b) shall be substituted:

  (b) “Registrar General” means the Inspector General of Registration
  appointed under section 3 of the Registration Act, 1908 (Act no.16 of
  1908);

3.  Amendment of Rule 4. In Rule 4 of the said rules, for sub -rule (3),
    the following sub-rule (3) shall be substituted:

  (3) The application mentioned in sub-rule (2) shall be accompanied by
  a certificate by a member of Parliament, member of State Legislature,
  Gazetted Officer, Pradhan of Gaon Sabha, Sarpanch of Nyaya Panchayat,
  Pramukh of Kshetra Samiti or President of any other Local Body and
  where any party to the marriage resides outside India, by the Indian
  Consul or Vice-Consul, as to the identity of the parties to the
  marriage and the correctness of other particulars appearing in the
  application, and shall be presented personally before the Registrar
  concerned; provided that where the applicant resides outside India, it
  may be sent through Indian Consul or Vice-consul by registered post.
  Where the person presenting the application so desires he shall be
  given a receipt for the application in the following form: “Received
  an application for registration of marriage between

  …….and ……..presented ………….by ………. Dated…………..

  (Signature) Registrar of Hindu Marriages…………..

4.  Substitution of Rule 10.-For Rule 10 of the said rules the following
    Rule 10 shall be substituted:

10. Fees-(1) The fee for entertaining an application for registration of
      a marriage shall be-

(i) Rs.2-00, if the application for registration of a marriage is made
      within two months of the date of its solemnization.

(ii) Rs.4-00, if the application for registration of marriage is made
       after two months of the date of its solemnization and shall be
       paid to the Registrar either in cash or by money order.

(2) Certified extract from the Hindu Marriage Register shall on an
      application to the Registrar or Registrar General be given by him
      on payment of Rs.2.00.

(3) For making a search, the fee shall be-

    i.  if the entry relates to the current year, Re.1.00;

    ii. if the entry relates to the immediately previous year, Rs.1.50P;

    iii. if the entry relates to the year before that, Rs.2.00 and so
           on, with an addition of 0.50P for each year.

5.  Amendment of Rule 13. In Rule 13 of the said Rules, for sub-rule (1)
    and (3), the following sub-rules (1) and (3) shall respectively be
    substituted:

    1.  If an application for registration of marriage or for a
          certified extract from the Marriage Register is incomplete or
          defective in any respect or is not accompanied by the fee
          specified in Rule 10, the Registrar shall require the
          applicant to remove the defect or pay the said fee, as the
          case may be, within such time as may be specified by him
          failing which the application shall be rejected.

  (3) Where an objection to any application for registration is received

  by a Sub-Registrar, he shall decide the same a also objections
  received by him after hearing the parties affected thereby and his
  decision shall subject to any decree or order of a competent court be
  final, in so far as the question of action on the application for
  registration is concerned.

6.  Substitution of Rule 14: In the said Rules, for Rule 14, the
    following Rule 14 shall be substituted:

  Rule 14. Superintendence.-The Registrar shall perform his duties and
  exercise his powers under the general superintendence of the Registrar
  General.

  7- Substitution of Form ‘A’ in the Schedule.- In the Schedule appended
  to the said Rules, for the existing Form ‘A’, the following Form ‘A’
  shall be substituted, namely;

  FORM ‘A’

  (See Rule 4(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Marriage Registration Rules,
  1973)

  To,

  The Registrar of Hindu Marriages,

  … District.

  Uttar Pradesh.

  Sir,

  A Hindu Marriage in accordance with the provisions of the Hindu
  Marriage Act, 1955 has been solemnized between us, the undersigned
  parties, on……. and we request that the following particulars of our
  marriage be registered in the Hindu Marriage Register.

  PARTICULARS OF MARRIAGE

1.  Date of marriage.

2.  Place of marriage (with sufficient particulars to locate the place)

3.  Particulars of bridegroom:

    a.  Full name and occupation

    b.  Domicile

    c.  Age

    d.  Usual place of residence

    e.  Permanent address

    f.  Address at the time of application

    g.  Status at the time of marriage, whether-

  Unmarried Widower Divorced

  Date….

4.  Particulars of the bride:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Domicile…….

    c.  Age

    d.  Usual place of residence………

  Signature of the bridegroom

e.  Permanent address………..

f.  Address at the time of application……….

g.  Status at the time of marriage, whether, unmarried, widower,
      divorced,

  Signature of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

5.  Full particulars of the bridegroom’s father:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Occupation……

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Address at the time of application……….

    f.  Whether alive or dead

  Signature of the father of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

  (N.B. Signature of the bridegroom’s father is not obligatory)

6.  Particulars of the bride’s father or other guardian:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Occupation……

    d.  Usual place of residence………

    e.  Address at the time of application……….

    f.  Relationship of the guardian with bride (See Section 6)

  Signature of the father of the bridegroom

  Dated…………

  (N.B. Signature of the bride’s father or guardian is not obligatory
  where the bride’s age is not less than 18 years, on the date of
  application but the signature of her father or guardian is necessary
  where on the date of application she is below 18 years and the
  marriage was performed in accordance with the law as in force on the
  date of marriage)

7.  Particulars of the Officiating Priest:

    a.  Full name ……….

    b.  Age ………..

    c.  Usual place of residence………

    d.  Address……

  (N.B. It shall not be obligatory to enter particulars of the
  officiating priest, if the marriage took place more than a year before
  the date of the application. His signature is not obligatory.)

  Signature of the officiating priest

  Dated…………

8.  Declaration. - I solemnly declare that the particulars given in this
    application, is so far as they relate to myself and to the
    solemnization of marriage are true to the best of my knowledge and
    the rest are based on information received and believed to be true.

  Signature of the Bridegroom Dated……….

9.  (1). Witness:

    a.  Full name…

    b.  Address…

  (2). Witness:

(a) Full name…

(b) Address…

  Signature of the bride

  Signature ……… Dated……………

  Signature Dated……………

  Certificate by ………… (Designation) (a Member if

  Parliament/Member of State Legislature/Gazetted Officer/Pradhan/
  Sarpanch/ Pramukh/President of a Local Body/Consul/Vice-Consul), as to
  the identity of the bridegroom and the bride and other particulars of
  this application is appended herewith.

  Note:- Certificate may be by more than one such person where one
  cannot certify to the identity of both the parties or all other
  particulars.
