The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937

  UNION OF INDIA

  India

The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937

Act 26 of 1937

-   Published in Gazette 26 on 7 October 1937

-   Assented to on 7 October 1937

-   Commenced on 7 October 1937

-   [This is the version of this document from 7 October 1937.]

-   [Note: The original publication document is not available and this
      content could not be verified.]

  The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937(ACT NO. XXVI
  OF 1937)[7th. October, 1937]An Act to make provision for the
  application of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) to MuslimsWHEREAS it
  is expedient to make provision for the application of the Muslim
  Personal Law (Shariat) to Muslims;

Short title and extent.—

1.  This Act may be called the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application
    Act, 1937.(2)It extends to the whole of India except the State of
    Jammu and Kashmir.

Application of Personal law to Muslims.—

  Notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary, in all questions
  (save questions relating to agricultural land) regarding intestate
  succession, special property of females, including personal property
  inherited or obtained under contract or gift or any other provision of
  Personal Law, marriage, dissolution of marriage, including talaq, ila,
  zihar, lian, khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship,
  gifts, trusts and trust properties, and wakfs (other than charities
  and charitable institutions and charitable and religious endowments)
  the rule of decision in cases where the parties are Muslims shall be
  the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat).[Triple Talaq - Shayara Bano v Union
  of India. The Supreme Court held that the practice of talaq-e-biddat
  or instantaneous triple talaq is unconstitutional. On March 30th,
  2017, the SC created a 5-Judge Constitution Bench to hear the matter.
  The Bench comprised Chief Justice J.S. Khehar and Justices Kurian
  Joseph, R.F.

  Nariman, U.U. Lalit and Abdul Nazeer. In a 3:2 split, the majority
  held that the practice of

  talaq-e-biddat was ‘manifestly arbitrary’ and unconstitutional. Chief
  Justice Khehar and Justice Nazeer dissented, stating that
  talaq-e-biddat was protected by the Right to Religion and that it was

  the job of Parliament to frame a law to govern the practice. This form
  of Talaq must, therefore, be held to be violative of the fundamental
  right contained under Article 14 of the Constitution of India. In our
  opinion, therefore, the 1937 Act, insofar as it seeks to recognize and
  enforce Triple Talaq, is within the meaning of the expression “laws in
  force” in Article 13(1) and must be struck down as being void to the
  extent that it recognizes and enforces Triple Talaq. The court has
  declared Section 2 of The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application
  Act, 1937 to be void to the extent indicated above on the narrower
  ground of it being manifestly arbitrary. Parliament enacted the Muslim
  Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019 which made the
  practice of talaq-e-biddat a criminal act, punishable with up to three
  years imprisonment. The Jamiat Ulama-I-Hind, Samastha Kerala Jamiathul
  Ulema, and the President of the Rashtriya Ulema Council challenged
  this Act in separate petitions at the Supreme Court in August 2019.
  However, the Court is yet to begin hearing arguments in the matter.
  (https:indiankanoon.org/doc/115701246/,

  https:legalserviceindia.com/legal/article-8548-case-analysis-of-shayara-bano-v-s-union-of-india.html)]

Power to make a declaration.—

2.  Any person who satisfies the prescribed authority—(a)that he is a
    Muslim; and(b)that he is competent to contract within the meaning of
    section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872); and(c)that
    he is a resident of the territories to which this Act extends,may by
    declaration in the prescribed form and filed before the prescribed
    authority declare that he desires to obtain the benefit of the
    provisions of this section, and thereafter the provisions of section
    2 shall apply to the declarant and all his minor children and their
    descendants as if in addition to the matters enumerated therein
    adoption, wills and legacies were also specified.(2)Where the
    prescribed authority refuses to accept a declaration under sub-
    section (1), the person desiring to make the same may appeal to such
    officer as the State Government may, by general or special order,
    appoint in this behalf, and such office may, if he is satisfied that
    the appellant is entitled to make the declaration, order the
    prescribed authority to accept the same.

Rule-making power.—

  (1)The State Government may make rules to carry into effect the
  purposes of this Act.(2)In particular and without prejudice to the
  generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or
  any of the following matters, namely:—(a)for prescribing the authority
  before whom and the form in which declarations under this Act shall be
  made;(b)for prescribing the fees to be paid for the filing of
  declarations and for the attendance at private residences of any
  person in the discharge of his duties under this Act; and for
  prescribing the times at which such fees shall be payable and the
  manner in which they shall be levied.(3)Rules made under the
  provisions of this section shall be published, in the Official Gazette
  and shall thereupon have effect as if enacted in this Act.(4)Every
  rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as
  soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.

Dissolution of marriage by Court in certain circumstances.—

  Rep. by the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 (8 of 1939),
  sec. 6 (17-3-1939).

Repeals.—

  The undermentioned provisions of the Acts and Regulations mentioned
  below shall be repealed in so far as they are inconsistent with the
  provisions of this Act, namely:—(1)Section 26 of the Bombay Regulation
  IV of 1827;(2)Section 16 of the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of
  1873);(4)Section 3 of the Oudh Laws Act, 1876 (18 of 1876);(5)Section
  5 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872 (4 of 1872);(6)Section 5 of the Central
  Provinces Laws Act, 1875 (20 of 1875); and(7)Section 4 of the

  Ajmer Laws Regulation, 1877 (Reg. 3 of 1877).
